go straight to Downing Street and the
daily coronavirus briefing daily
briefing I'm joined by the deputy chief
medical officer professor van tam and by
Professor John Newton at the heart of
our plan is ensuring that NHS capacity
is always ahead of need this means that
if you or someone you love needs
hospital care with kovat 19 then you
will always get that care if God forbid
you need care in an intensive care unit
then you will have that bed and the
life-saving equipment and team that you
need the latest figures show another
record high of two thousand nine hundred
and sixty three spare critical care beds
available across the NHS we can we set
at the start of this that our primary
goal in our battle plan was to slow the
spread and protect the NHS by flattening
the curve an increasing capacity that
plan is working at no point in this
crisis has anyone who could benefit from
critical care been denied that care
because there weren't enough staff or
beds or ventilators to treat them but
there is much further to go on the most
recent figures five hundred and thirty
five thousand three hundred and forty
two tests have now been carried out in
the UK excluding Northern Ireland of
these a hundred and twenty nine thousand
and forty four have tested positive the
number of patients in hospital we've
covered nineteen symptoms is now down to
seventeen thousand six hundred and
eighty one seventeen thousand three
hundred and sixty-six people have sadly
died in hospital which is an increase of
852 this number is another salutary
lesson and it tells us of the deadly
nature of this virus we owe it to them
and to ourselves not to throw away the
progress we've made so far we have been
clear that we will not risk lives by
relaxing the social distancing rules
before our five tests have been met
first that the NHS can continue to cope
second that the operational challenges
can be met third that the daily death
rate falls sustainably and consistently
that the fourth that the rate of
infection is decreasing and most
importantly that there is no risk of a
second peak I now want to update you on
two specific areas of huge importance
first PPE protective equipment delivery
is an operation of unprecedented scale
and complexity since the start of the
crisis we've now delivered over a
billion items of PPE we start with
constantly working to improve that
delivery system buying PPE
from a brand around the world and
working to make more here at home we
have a diverse range of suppliers and
we're working day and night to expand
that supply base we're in direct talks
with the factories that actually produce
the PPE and the fabric that it's made of
this has proved one of most fruitful
avenues and I want to especially thank
my foreign office and di T colleagues
especially in China for the incredible
work making these connections I also
want to thank the enormous response
we've had from our appeal for companies
to come forward to help replenish the
stocks as of yesterday we've had 8,000
331 offers of PPE equipment and we're
investigating each and every one of
those many leads now of course some of
these leads have led to very large scale
purchases of many millions of items but
the reality is that not each of them not
everyone who approaches us can deliver
on their offers in scale I'm very
grateful to all those who have come
forward and we are now actively engaged
with thousands of these companies and I
can announce that we're working with a
hundred and five
Denine potential UK manufacturers which
are starting to come on stream I've said
many times that I am determined
determined to get people the PPE that
they need this is a 24/7 operation it's
one of the biggest cross government
operations I've ever seen and I'm
grateful to colleagues from the NHS from
public health England the crown
commercial service cabinet office
communities Department the Ministry of
Defense the Armed Forces that devolved
administration's and the territorial
offices the business department the
Treasury the Foreign Office and the
Department for international trade for
their enormous hard work on this and I'm
also very grateful to Lord Dayton who
delivered the Olympics for stepping
forward to lead this national effort and
deliver once again for his country
the second area I want to talk about is
vaccines in the long run the best way to
defeat coronavirus is through a vaccine
after all this is a new disease this is
uncertain science but I'm certain that
we will throw everything we've got at
developing a vaccine the UK is at the
forefront of the global effort we've put
more money than any other country into
the global search for a vaccine and for
all the efforts around the world two of
the leading vaccine developments taking
place here at home at Oxford and
Imperial both of these promising
projects are making rapid progress and
I've told the scientists leading them
that we'll do everything in our power to
support first I'm today making twenty
two point five million pounds available
to the Imperial project to support their
Phase two clinical trials which are
going to assess a sample of several
thousand and for them to begin the work
on subsequently a very large phase three
trial second I'm today making available
20 million pounds to the Oxford team to
fund their clinical trials the team have
accelerated that transparent process
working with the regular
later the MHRA who have been absolutely
brilliant and as a result I can announce
that the fact that the vaccine from the
Oxford project will be trialed
in people from this Thursday in normal
times reaching this stage would take
years and I'm very proud of the work
taken so far at the same time we'll
invest in manufacturing capability so
that if either of these vaccines safely
works then we can make it available for
the British people as soon as humanly
possible nothing about this process is
certain vaccine development is a process
of trial and error and trial again
that's the nature of how vaccines are
developed but I told Sarah Gilbert and
Robin Shattuck two of our most inspiring
scientists that we are going to back
them to the hilt and give them every
resource that they need to get the best
possible chance of success as soon as
possible after all the upside of being
the first country in the world to
develop a successful vaccine is so huge
that I am throwing everything at it
coronavirus is a powerful enemy but I
believe that the power of human
ingenuity is stronger every day the
science gets better and we gather more
information and we understand more about
how to defeat the virus but in the
meantime there's one thing that you can
do and that is to stay at home to
protect the NHS and save lives thank you
very much I'm now going to ask professor
van Tam to take us through the daily
statistics Thank You Secretary of State
I'll begin with a slide that you've seen
many times before I don't apologize for
sharing it again it is important that we
continue to monitor the extent to which
the British people are following the
social distancing advice and in this
case referring to the sly
not traveling and you can see a range of
indicators there from all private Motor
Vehicles through buses and tubes in
London through to buses and national
rail in the whole of the UK and you can
see a very clear prolongation of these
low trends of usage compared to where we
were in the middle of March this is a
good sign it shows that we are
continuing to follow the advice given to
us by the government and that in doing
so we will get on top of the current
wave of the coronavirus threat and we
will begin to turn the curve next slide
please
this next slide again you have seen
before shows the new cases diagnosed in
the UK the dates along the bottom of the
slide refer to when the lab tests for
that individual were completed and you
can see of course that there is some
day-to-day variation but the numbers
remain high and it isn't clear that
there is a enormous downturn at this
point so the numbers are varying day to
day but they remain high and we remain
in a situation of danger that we must
take very seriously indeed you will see
as the slide progresses from left to
right the proportion of orange beginning
to show greater and greater this is a
distinction between the NHS and public
health England capacity and testing in
blue and the coming on stream of
commercial testing to supplement that as
time goes by across the slide next slide
please
now this is a very important slide and
of course refers to people the total
number of people in hospital in Great
Britain with kovat 19 and you can see a
variety of curves here from the top one
referring to London through the other
curves
referring to the different regions of
England Scotland Wales and what you can
see is that there in terms of the number
of people in hospital there has been a
peak in London it was probably around
the 10th of April that kind of date and
since then there has been a decline but
in the other parts of the graph that is
to say Scotland Wales and the other
regions in England I suggest to you that
there is rather more of a plateau than
anything else at this point in time it
is not absolutely clear that there have
been peaks nor is it absolutely clear
that the rate is that the number of
cases is dropping in the same way that
we can illustrate it on the slide for
London so again this is important it
shows the regional variations in how the
virus has been affecting the UK it shows
that we are not out of danger at this
point and that the curve is flat but not
very clearly going down in many parts of
the country I'm sure it will go down in
the days and weeks that follow but we
must keep pushing on this and we must
bend that curve through our actions next
slide please now here you see a slide
that arrays data by week from the 20th
of March through to the 10th of April
and it shows you first of all deaths in
hospital from Co vyd 19 those are the
blue columns on the the graph and those
are are by dative report in the hospital
and the orange bars show the all weakly
registered deaths registered to the
Aussie Office for National Statistics
and those are by date of registration
and please be very careful in comparing
these statistics because as you will
know unfortunately if you've lost
someone it takes a while for a death
certificate to the issued
and for that to be registered with the
office for national statistics so there
is inevitably some difference between
those two bars and we are not comparing
apples with apples we're comparing
apples with pears on this particular
slide but it does
I hope help you understand the trends in
the mortality data and we need to see
that turn we'll have to wait a little
longer but we need to see that turn
thank you
finally I will show you a slide I've
shown you before about global death
comparisons again as I've said before
the cite the slide is indexed on time
point zero when a country and declares
its first 50 cumulative deaths now for
almost all of the the countries on this
slide the reporting as in the UK has
been for hospital deaths and you can see
there that there are broadly three
patterns the United States on its own
the European countries other than
Germany in the middle of the pack and
some outliers who have had very low
rates of death on the slide if you look
carefully you will see a curve for UK
hospitals only and a UK all settings
which is lagged further behind which
includes all of the deaths reported to
the ons but you will see that they are
on the same trajectory within the same
framing of those middle countries these
are important comparisons but what will
be really important in the future and we
do not yet have those data are
international comparisons of excess
deaths particularly across Europe where
a pretty standardized methodology is
used for counting excess deaths but
those data take time to assemble and I
don't have them for you today thank you
okay thanks very much indeed Jonathan
first question
is going to be from Lawrenceburg at the
BBC Thank You Secretary of State and
just on PvE this was declared a pandemic
well over a month ago why is the
government still having to scramble now
to get our health workers the equipment
they need and allowing UK firms we've
been hearing from today who could supply
British hospitals and care homes to sell
their products abroad well as you know
Laura we've been pushing at making sure
that we get PPE to the frontline to the
people who need it since right at the
start of this of this crisis and
especially since the the the big
increase in demand about a month ago
we've now shipped over a billion items
and we're also at the same time
replenishing the stocks on a 24/7 basis
now I've described something of the
operation to do that and we bought a
huge proportion of that from overseas
and and that will that will continue to
make sure that alongside making more PPE
here we also buy it from the big
producers especially in China and that's
where the big numbers are of making sure
that we get that PPE into the country
out to the frontline where is needed can
I come back in okay you know day after
day we are hearing from people on the
front line that they do not have enough
I mean how do you explain the gap
between what you were saying about
getting everything in place and what
people who are working on wards or
working in care homes are actually
experiencing and what administers
suggests there was some kind of mix-up
about not taking part in the EU scheme
to get medical kit when the most senior
civil servant at the Foreign Office said
this afternoon it was a political
decision to use his phrase well I
haven't seen that exchange but I have
spoken to the foreign secretary and as
far as I'm aware there was no political
decision not to participate in that ski
when the we did receive an invitation in
the Department for health because it
came to the depart for health it was put
up to me to be asked and we joined so we
are now members of that scheme however
as far as I know that scheme hasn't yet
delivered a single item of PPE so I
think the most important thing that we
concentrate on is what are the offers
that can get us the most PPE to be able
to get it into the country to be able to
manufacture it here and to be able to
then get it out to the frontline and
we're doing everything we possibly can
to make that happen
Robert Peston ITV you are muted going on
okay can you hear me now yes good
afternoon is it correct that you're not
ready to change your advice on the
usefulness for general public in wearing
masks because you don't want to deprive
health care workers masks and secondly
you have dramatically increased the
capacity to test we're up to the
capacity of 40,000 a day but only 20,000
are actually happening there seems to be
a problem of actually carrying out the
tesam and delivering the swabs to the
labs we've spoken at ITV to care homes
who say they are too far from the test
centres and they're not getting enough
help when it comes to testing their
residents yes well look on both points
on the use of face masks we are advised
by the science and we've been asked this
question many times at this in this
forum and we listen to what the
scientists say there was a meeting of
Sage that I think addressed this
question earlier today I look forward to
hearing from that and then to ministers
making decisions based on the science as
always and on the question of tests it's
I think it's terrific
I might bring John Newton in in a minute
but it's it's terrific that we have
managed to increase the capacity to
over 39,000 tests a day which is higher
than our planned trajectory of course
having excess capacity means that we can
then expand who that capacity can be
used by and also exactly as you say
increase the availability to two more
people make it easier to access so one
example is that we have introduced home
testing where a test can be sent out and
taken and and then returned so that the
individual doesn't need to move and
obviously home testing will be
particularly helpful to those living in
care homes for whom exactly as you say a
trip to a drive-through testing center
might be a might be a difficult thing to
do a job thank you security so yes
capacity has gone up dramatically and in
fact he's going to continue going up a
lot quite soon so we can now say we are
meeting the requirement in hospitals
we're also meeting the requirement to
test NHS and care staff with the
drive-in centres we've tested over one
hundred a hundred thousand staff and
many of those have gone back to work and
in fact NHS sickness absence rates are
now falling as a result so that's very
good news we're now progressively
expanding the access so you're quite
right the drive-in centres are not
necessarily ideal for people working in
a distributed system like the care
sector
so although access is available in NHS
labs and NHS settings which which is
very widely distributed where we're
piloting a number of different ways of
getting tests out to people both
directly sending swabs to care homes
also a secre state mention testing at
home and also mobile delivery so where
there are a number of ways we can get
the swabs to the people rather than
expecting the people to come to the
swabs is that it does that satisfy just
if I could just ask I suppose John the
bad time would be best on this is the
priority when it comes to face masks
prank you know health care workers and
although there may be a case for the
general public music them at some point
this would just not be the right moment
thank you for the question Robert I
think I'd kind of
why on four points the first thing to
say is I have always said to you that we
will keep the evidence under review and
we are absolutely doing that I've also
said to you that we will change if we
feel that the evidence is driving is
that way and we will advise ministers
accordingly Sage has indeed met today
and discussed personal protective
equipment and advice we'll go to
ministers in due course and I'm not
going to comment about that any further
today nor would you expect me to what I
can say is that there is an absolutely
enduring principle here that sage places
great value and prime importance on
never jeopardizing the supplies of PPE
to our health and social care workers
and that is a line we are not going to
cross under any circumstances thanks
Robert
Victoria McDonald channel 4 Thank You
Secretary of State just back on PP PPE
we have talked to a number of suppliers
and distributors who have talked a lot
about the obstacles they've faced of
getting through the procurement system
so they will send an email they will
make a telephone call they don't hear
back then they'll be asked questions
they've already answered are you
satisfied that you are somehow going to
clear away those obstacles so that you
can increase the supply and secondly
we've heard a lot about we've heard a
lot of numbers over the past few weeks
and today you've just talked about 1
billion it-- 1 billion items of PPE now
that sounds a lot but quite clearly it's
not enough do you have any idea about
what enough would be well yes I mean the
answer on how much is enough PPE is
enough to get it what is needed
according to the guidelines that have
been clearly set out by a public health
England to everyone who who needs it and
it is in the billions of items over
/ / per month
I mean it is the the numbers of items
that are needed are absolutely vast and
hence the need both to manufacture it at
home and also to buy it from abroad
we're always in trying to improve the
processes that we have in place to make
purchases
I think it's been it's been very
encouraging the number of UK companies
that have come forward but we have had
to make sure that we sort out the
credible offers from those that are not
we've had some offers for instance that
have come from companies where upon
investigation the company has only just
been formed in the previous day or two
before coming and asking for a cash deal
with the government and so you'll
understand that there has to be some
process in there nevertheless we want to
engage with all of those companies who
can who can help us in this national
effort and we are accelerating the
progress of getting back to all of those
companies with a substantive response to
their offer this is a fast moving market
because essentially the problem on PPE
is that there is a global shortage there
is more there's more demand across the
world than there is supply and that
means that we need to be as as nimble as
we possibly can and crucially as much as
possible get right to the source of the
PPE which is often in factories in Asia
including in in China rather than going
through middlemen which can seem
attractive on the surface but actually
if you get directly to the factory owner
then you get a more secure supply so it
is a it is a complicated picture and
none of this takes away of the
importance of delivering on this agenda
or the the resources and the support
that we're we're throwing at it and
Daniel wooden talk radio good afternoon
secretary of state a report by the EU
agency the European external
Action Service to be published this week
concludes that official and state-backed
Chinese sources are behind the spread of
conspiracy narratives designed to
exonerate the Chinese government
overgrown a virus the report will say
China has run a global disinformation
campaign to deflect blame for the
outbreak of the pandemic what is the UK
government doing to stop these Chinese
disinformation campaigns well I haven't
seen that report and I haven't seen any
evidence of what you described but we
have seen more broadly disinformation
and disinformation being put about
especially on social media and tackling
that is incredibly important because
what the public want and what the public
should be able to expect is high quality
information highly factual even in this
uncertain environment because we're
still learning about the disease fight
to be able to be as as clear and
transparent as possible and for the
government to describe which information
we think is we have high confidence in
and to be able to explain the
conclusions we reach from that
information and so tackling
disinformation
is an important part of it but I'm
afraid I can't comment on the on the
specific piece that you refer to Chris
Smith from The Times Thank You state can
I ask about a symptomatic transmission
given the need to isolate cases in any
easing restrictions how big an issue
this is going to be in terms of
hindering any attempt to ease lockdown
and the risk that whatever we do will we
could get peak because of this and
relate to that kind of current test
actually pick up cases when people are
not showing symptoms with any accuracy
and given concerns about transmission in
hospitals at the moment as well as the
huge amounts of unused testing capacity
we have right now should we now be
screening a symptomatic health star for
the virus well these are very very good
questions
what I'd say is that the the cut of the
the fact that this virus appears to have
a symptomatic transmission makes it
incredibly difficult to deal with and
one is the what is one of the central
facts of this pandemic that has made it
as difficult and as challenging as it is
and I'll ask jvt to answer on the
science of the of the transmission and
the asymptomatic transmission in
particular and then John Newton to
answer the question on the testing but
these are exactly the right scientific
questions that we are also grappling
with thanks extra state you're
absolutely right
and really the secretary state has
answered the medical question for me you
did when we started when we started this
crisis we did not have enough
information to understand the extent to
which patients who were pre symptomatic
and asymptomatic were shedding the virus
we now have a lot more information and
it is clear that there for at least a
proportion of patients they begin to
shed the virus before the onset of
symptoms and we of course have
scientific data now that show that some
people are asymptomatic and we can still
detect the virus using a PCR a test
where the difficulty in the science
comes is understanding just how
infectious those other people those
people were either pre symptomatic or
asymptomatic are compared to those who
are symptomatic and remember they don't
have the cough they don't have the
respiratory symptoms they don't have the
same means of expelling the virus to the
same amount so I think it's absolutely
impossible to rule out that there are
some cases where spread occurs from
asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic
oh but the vast majority of the force of
transmission in the community is still
coming from those people with symptoms
that isn't to say that we're not picking
up the asymptomatic infections I hope
I've been very clear on that we
recognize they exist now but the extent
to which they are the primary problem as
opposed to the primary problem for
transmission being the people who've got
the cough got the fever and are clearly
omitting the virus through coughing and
sneezing
they are undoubtedly the biggest route
of transmission in our communities and
the public health advice remains the
same that the moment you have symptoms
of kovat 19 you go home and you begin
self isolation and if you live in a
household with others then you take them
with you and the family isolates with
you for 14 days thanks yeah thank you
thank you Chris for the question
so the simple answer is yes the test
will detect for the presence of the
virus and people are asymptomatic and
one of the ways we're using the current
testing capacity is to do scientific
studies to show the spread of the virus
in representative populations and we're
ramping up that activity quite a lot to
give us more of this sort of information
but it's already obvious from the early
studies that in areas in particular
settings where social distancing isn't
possible particularly closed areas such
as in hospitals or in care homes or
indeed in prisons there is a need to go
in and do intensive testing to try and
understand how many people might be
asymptomatic and carrying the virus so
those studies are underway and we're
working closely particular with the NHS
to design a an approach to that so the
one of the looking to the future one of
the reasons we need a good level of
testing capacity is to provide the
testing for infection control so when we
do have outbreaks of infection in
certain settings we need to be able to
go in and test not just people who are
symptomatic but also people are
asymptomatic and
that is that is what we are doing does
that satisfy you Chris
yeah can I can I just follow up a
present those early lung study children
what does that show about the extent of
transmission in healthcare settings
there just to clarify the point about
screening of NHS stock can we expect
that to make a contribution to meeting
the hundred thousand target by next week
well it's a there's an international
literature which shows for example this
study from New York in women in
maternity setting showing a significant
number a small proportion who were who a
somatic and had positive tests and we
also know from studies that public are
the England is carried out in some care
home settings that a number of staff and
residents who were asymptomatic have
test positive so it's all very
consistent internationally it's a small
proportion and it's also important to
emphasize that the test is not a screen
so the idea that you would use the test
to screen the whole population or indeed
to screen the whole of the workforce
isn't isn't really how the test could be
could be you so you would test somebody
on day one and on day two they might
become positive and you wouldn't know so
it's a we use the test to understand the
spread of the virus in a population or
in a setting in order to be able to put
in place the measures required to
control that infection it's not to be
used broadly as a stream that's
certainly not the current thinking but
as Jonathan has said very important that
we keep an eye on the science and if the
science develops further then we will
need to change our testing strategy
obviously and to answer your question of
will we do testing of asymptomatic staff
in hospital as part of meeting the
100,000 target at the end of the month
the answer to that is yes and we have a
plan to be able to do that as we as we
expand access to testing to meet the
capacity that as we can see from the
figures that capacity is increasingly
available on the road to 100,000 tests a
day thanks Chris PIPA Korea from the
Daily Mirror
I'm out to go question professor Newton
but before I do Secretary of State if I
could just clarify following on from
Lauren's question the top diplomats at
the Foreign Office says were not in the
EU PPS scheme and that the decision not
to take part was a political one but now
you're saying it wasn't a political
decision and we I remember the scheme
which I believe is the first time we've
heard that you can't both be right who
should we be believing well the the the
invitation when it came in to the
Department for health and I know there's
been debate about whether it was sent to
the wrong email address initially but
the invitation when it came to the
Department for Health to participate in
this scheme in an associate way because
we're not members of the EU came to me
for decision and I said yes but having
said that this as far as I am aware this
scheme has not yet delivered any PPE and
that's the decision-making process that
I was involved in it was there was a
recommendation and I took the decision
in the normal way and that's the that's
the long and short of it but the impact
of this on our ability to deliver PPE
has zero there's no impact at all
because the scheme has not yet made
anything available a John I haven't
asked the question yet
yes a Newton it's a different subject
that's John airports hundreds of
thousands of people continue to arrive
in the UK each week airports and ports
and countries like Japan mr. Lee have
introduced temperature checks and other
forms of screening weeks ago and in some
cases have quarantine restrictions in
place from your arrivals just wondering
why we haven't followed a similar route
and whether it's something that we might
yet consider well it's a it's a larger
question really about how we respond in
the future to the pandemic and I think
I'm going to pass that one to Jonathan
because this is these are exactly the
sort of questions that the sage are
considering so
with port of entry screening there is a
basic problem that the length of a
flight from a far-flung place to the UK
is typically no more than 12 hours think
we'd agree on that but the problem is
that people can be infected before they
get on the fight and the incubation
period for this virus is up to 14 days
and it's typically five days so I can
fly back from well you choose the
country wherever you like on a long
flight
and I can become infected in that
country before I get on the aircraft and
I will sail through Heathrow with
absolutely no symptoms at all I'm not
being untruthful there's nothing to
declare I won't have a fever I won't be
picked out but when I get back to my
home in the north of England at that
point I may develop symptoms a few days
later and go oh I don't feel too well
and clearly the port of entry screening
hasn't worked so that's the basic
mathematical problem that goes with it
right now though we are in a situation
where you've seen from the slides that I
showed to you that there is a widespread
transmission in the UK we are turning
that down it is clear we are turning it
down but it is still there and it has
not gone away and so the proportion of
new cases coming in from abroad even if
flights were operating would be
minuscule compared to the amount of
force of infection currently still
moving around in our societies in the UK
and that I hope gives you a bit of
context for the here-and-now we do at
some point hope that we turn this curve
down and that we then start to think
about how and when and how carefully we
begin to think about easing some of the
restrictions we're under without letting
this virus just
chase off again and that's a really
difficult balancing act and all things
will be under consideration all
scientific options will be under
consideration at that point I am sure
about that thanks very much
Geraldine Scott from the Yorkshire Post
thank you and your peers own captains on
porous open to the NHS Nightingale
hospital in Harrogate today taking the
decision during this crisis to close the
veteran guk helpline which helps many
like him so will you consider opening
that again to help others like Captain
Moore at the impact worsens and secondly
some NHS staff are being threatened with
referrals to their professional or
regulatory bodies for speaking out about
the crisis whether it's PPE or how it's
affecting them personally and Secretary
of State is it right for NHS trusts to
be doing this and can you guarantee that
no NHS or Social Care work and punished
the reigning legitimate concerns
publicly well yes of course people
should be able to to talk about the
problems that there are and indeed they
do and I've seen both fantastic examples
of people saying that they're working
hard and celebrating the fact that
they're celebrating the wrong word of of
going public with the work they're doing
and the conditions that they're working
on there and I've all and I've also seen
and the some people for instance saying
that they're delighted that there's good
PPE and we've also seen people saying
that there's a problem in their area and
that's I think that's totally normal and
standard and and people should feel free
to talk about what happens at work I
think that transparency is important and
it's the sort of approach we've tried to
take as a government including with
press conferences like these in terms of
the veterans UK point I will I'm afraid
I'll have to take that away and make
sure that somebody gets back to you on
the details of it because it's a
it's it's an important area but it's not
one that I got a direct answer to today
thanks and finally Alistair smelt from
Reuters no thank you
Secretary of State you say the plan is
working yesterday
PhD medical director Avon Doyle said
start showed about 10% of total covert
19 deaths taking place outside of
hospitals the onest figures published
today said the number could be about 40%
higher than the daily hospital figure
and it's clear now that the UK's death
toll could match or even surpass Italy's
to make it the worst hit country in
Europe so it feels like at least
compared to large parts of Europe the
plan isn't working
who has ultimate responsibility for that
well thanks for the question what I'd
say is that on the factual points you've
got a it's important to get the analysis
of those right and I've seen this 40
percent figure and I am asked the team
about it before coming here and that is
that is not an accurate representation
of those figures in fact professor van
tan took us through the the the
important differences between how we
measure Hospital deaths in hospitals
which we can get that data daily and so
it's incredibly important for tracking
as soon as possible what's what's
happening in terms of the impact of this
disease with the ONS data which is
measured in a different way and if the
slides can come up again we can bring
the slide up which shows that that gap
which is around between 20 and 25% in
the latest data and all all of these
information are important of course they
are and we take as much information as
we possibly can into account when we
make when we make decisions and then on
the second point of the international
comparison it's very important again to
look at that and take into canvas eyes
of the country and the different
characteristics of the different
countries so looking per
perb population is the right way to look
at those information and the final point
I'd make is that at the start of this
crisis we said that there were two
absolutely critical tasks and they were
form part of the battle plan that we
published a long time before the
lockdown began when we published the
types of measures we might have to take
one is that we got the exponential
nature of this infection under control
and brought the curve down and as you
can see from the statistics that curve
is now flat and there are some there's
some there's that is that means that we
have achieved that objective the second
thing is that we said that we must do
everything we can to ensure the NHS is
not overwhelmed and lots of people said
that will be impossible but we have
achieved that because every single
person who has needed treatment has been
able to get that treatment it's per
including with the building of the NHS
knighting hospitals for instance that
we're referred to in the previous
question because the NHS Nightingale
hospital in Harrogate has opened today
and that will ensure that there's more
NHS capacity for people of Yorkshire and
the northeast and and the therefore it
on those two core measures the plan is
working now does that mean that the that
every problem has been addressed no of
course it doesn't I've gone through some
of the details on PPE today we're and
there are clearly challenges and does it
mean that everything's done now it
doesn't
for instance the search for a vaccine is
absolutely a top priority and I'm
delighted that the first vaccines in
this country will go into human clinical
trials on Thursday and so there is far
there is a huge amount still to do but
on the absolutely central core
objectives that we faced as a country
thanks to the work of the NHS the Armed
Forces
many many others and the people who have
stayed at home we have managed to both
bend down the curve and also ensure that
the NHS capacity is there to deal with
the with the cases that come through so
that everyone can rely on the NHS when
they need it if I could just come back I
think a lot of people would say that
Germany is a comparable sized country to
Britain and obviously is faring fairly
well but in my comparison
yes so I would absolutely I absolutely
concur with that of course and then
there are we are there is some countries
where on that measure they're below us
and there are other countries where
they're above us
and the critical thing when you're
trying to work out as we do every day
how do we make sure that we do our very
best for this country you absolutely
take that into account
you learn from where things are going
for well in fact we learn also from
places where things aren't going so well
and we're constantly looking around the
world at those comparisons and it's
exactly right but the important thing
we've got you've got to do is
scientifically look at the the
consequences of what people are doing
elsewhere so that we can learn about it
as a country okay thank you very much
indeed that concludes today's Downing
Street conference press conference and
I'm very grateful to Professor van town
and to Professor John Newton for your
support thanks very much indeed
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News